I was fortunate to grow up in an environment which valued education highly. I was raised
in a single-parent household by my mother, who was an associate professor of philosophy
at the time. Our house was full of books, we spent many hours in her office at the local
university, and she was always busy grading papers. She never pushed me to take school
serious because she never needed to: like many children, my mother was a role model for
me – since her life was about education I wanted mine to be too. In time this drive to learn
turned into a deep love for learning.
She’s also (indirectly) responsible for passion I have for independent learning. Being an
associate professor is hard work and took almost all of her time. While my sister and I
played outside, swam in the apartment complex’s pool, or watched movies I remember my
mother constantly planning class, reading papers, and writing. Because of her necessary
preoccupation with her job, I became very independent early on: biking to school, cooking,
and handling all schoolwork on my own.
Of course, there were hard times too. My mother ended up not getting tenure, and
proceeded to spend the next several years in an out of employment. At the same time she
struggled with a resurgent mental illness. During these period my sister and I had to be even
more self-sufficient, since our mother couldn’t help but focus on finding a job and coping
with psychological issues. On the whole though, my childhood was very good I can could
count on our house being a place were my family would encourage me to keep on learning
about anything and everything that interested me.
In many ways my high school experience was an extension of this environment. Our
high school was known for having really good teachers in Math, Science, and History, and
the student body was one that admired academic accomplishment rather than ridiculing it.
Everyone also seemed to have a remarkable amount of faith in me – believing in me even
when I didn’t believe in myself.
However, this academic paradise was only part of the school. The same instructors who
taught us IB Math and Physics would turn around and teach Algebra I and Earth Science. In
talking to them about the experience I learned that the biggest difference between students
taking advanced and remedial courses was not their ability but their environment: the ways
that their family, society, and peers influenced them. At the time this was very surprising
to me.
However, my experiences since have only confirmed this observation. I’ve overwhelmingly
seen that while the educational institution idolizes meritocracy, in reality performance is
influenced more by the environment students are in than by any characteristics inherent to
students. If we want to live in a world were one’s potential is determined by individual effort
and talent rather than accidents of heredity, race, and economics, then we cannot ignore
these environmental factors.
While I was encouraged to learn, and was supported by my peers and teachers in times
of distress or doubt, the same is not true for all students. Across the United States there
are socio-economic environments which do not emphasize education as heavily as mine did.
There are students who are actively or passively discouraged from pursuing their interests
because of their race or gender. These patterns of encouragement and discouragement ulti-
mately perpetuate a world in which members of some demographic groups are less likely to
be able to pursue their interests, for no good reason. This is not the world that I want to live
in, and for that reason I’m committed to supporting, in particular, the education of people
whose demographic group has been historically underrepresented in higher education, and
in particular in STEM.
As a professor, I’d be particularly well positioned to do that. At Mudd I’ve seen how
changes in the way curriculum is formulated and material is presented can have a dramatic
impact on how accessible it is to students with weaker academic backgrounds. By making
material more accessible one enables members underrepresented groups, who might have a
weaker academic background, to still get up to speed with their peers. I’ve also seen how
helpful it is for the institution to create support networks for underrepresented groups who
might have a hard time establishing these networks on their own. I’ve seen how professor
involvement in support networks like this lends them credibility and encourages students to
join. Ultimately I’ve seen that professors have an incredible influence on the educational
environment of an institution, and I’ve seen the effectiveness of inclusive educational environments
in encouraging members of historically underrepresented groups to pursue careers
in STEM.
While a professors research has the potential to fundamentally reshape the world, the
reality is that such dramatic impacts are rare. However, all professors have the opportunity
to positively impact the lives of their students in a meaningful way. As a professor I look
forward to creating an inclusive and collaborative educational environment which supports
the education of all students, and the education of members of traditionally underrepresented
groups in particular.
