Digital technology is finding its way into numerous aspects of life and society that were
once considered the sole domain of humans, from wearable devices to smart homes to selfdriving
cars. Already, such increased integration between the digital world and the human world
has shown promising benefits. However, it also brings with it a new set of technical challenges.
Unlike the digital world, with its rigorously defined and maintained standards, the real world is
fuzzy. People speak with different accents in different languages, write with unique handwriting,
and display their emotions in varying ways. Thus, as machines become more integrated into
everyday life, they will need to be designed to operate and thrive in the uncertainty of the outside
world.
This problem of bridging the gap between humans and machines is precisely what I am
interested in researching. In particular, I am interested in the application of artificial intelligence
and machine learning to help computers extract meaningful information from the outside world
for use in interaction with humans. AI and machine learning are already being used to help
computers navigate the uncertainty of the human world; for instance, many smartphones now
come with so-called “digital assistants” that do a decent job of hearing and interpreting spoken
questions. I believe that with further research, more fields can benefit from such applications of
AI and machine learning; for instance, digital education might benefit from systems that can read
the emotion of students and adapt accordingly. I want to be at the forefront of this exploration,
learning more about the current state-of-the-art in AI and machine learning and using these
techniques to develop new systems that can better understand and interact with humans.
Recently, this desire led me to participate in an REU at the University of Southern
California. There, I worked with Professor Stefan Scherer at the Institute for Creative
Technologies, a lab devoted to precisely the type of research I am interested in: bridging the
divide between the physical and digital realms. Specifically, I worked on a project known as
Cicero, a public speaking training platform in which users can practice speeches in front of a
virtual audience, which reacts appropriately based on factors such as the speaker’s perceived
emotional state (e.g. nervousness). To determine the appropriate reaction, Cicero needs a way to
evaluate the speaker’s emotion in the first place. Emotion detection is a difficult task for
computers, partly due to the lack of an objective scale for measuring emotion, and also due to the
vast spread in how different people show their emotions. This makes it a natural target for the
application of machine learning, which is exactly what I was tasked with investigating.
To this end, I helped design and implement a deep neural network for classifying a
speaker’s emotion based on their speech samples. Many existing methods for doing this achieve
relatively low accuracy, so Professor Scherer and I were interested in designing ways to modify
existing models to improve their performance. Specifically, we developed a way to turn an
unsupervised emotion classifier into a semi-supervised model, allowing it to leverage unlabeled
data and in doing so potentially achieve improved performance. In addition to implementing a
neural network that incorporates these modifications, I worked with Professor Scherer to set up
an experimental procedure for evaluating our methods, and spent a great deal of my final weeks
developing and running tests to evaluate our model. Overall, we found the results to be very
promising. Our model achieved near state-of-the-art performance, and performed noticeably
better on the emotion classification task compared to a basic model without our modifications.
My REU experience was productive and educational in several ways. For one, this was
my first experience working with neural networks, so I was able to gain technical knowledge that
I can apply in my future studies. In addition, I got firsthand experience designing and executing
an experimental method in the context of computer science research, as opposed to the physical 
sciences context that is typical of laboratory coursework. Finally, Cicero was by necessity an
interdisciplinary project, and so I worked with not only other computer scientists, but also
linguists and psychologists. Given that my research interests lie in applying AI and machine
learning to fields that have traditionally relied upon human insight, my future research will likely
also involve such cross-discipline collaboration. As such, my experience working with
researchers from other fields on Cicero provides a firm foundation for future collaborations.
Another project I have worked on that relates to my research interests is my Clinic
project (Clinic is Harvey Mudd’s team-based senior capstone experience). The project aims to
use machine learning to identify aggression and/or bullying in internet comment threads. Much
like the task of emotion classification, identification of aggression is typically performed by
humans and is difficult for computers to do, once again in part due to variation in how different
people, and indeed different communities, display and perceive aggressiveness. In the Clinic
project, I have helped to design and evaluate several machine learning pipelines for detecting
aggressive content. I have also gotten valuable experience with feature engineering, helping to
come up with ideas for relevant features to feed into the learning pipeline, and evaluating their
impact on the model’s performance.
Both my REU and Clinic projects show how systems that can interact with the human
world may concretely benefit people. I hope to pursue more research opportunities of this kind in
the future, and graduate school will give me an opportunity to do so. In the long term, I hope to
become a college professor, which will allow me to not only continue leading research efforts in
bridging the human-digital divide, but also explore another one of my interests: teaching. For
me, teaching is an opportunity to share my passion for research and computer science with other
people, as well as a way to help develop future generations of researchers. This interest has led
me to participate as a tutor for Harvey Mudd’s computer science department for most of my time
here, and I hope to continue this practice in graduate school via a teaching assistantship. Between
research and teaching, graduate school will be the ideal launching point for my future goals.
I am particularly interested in pursuing my PhD at UC Berkeley because several Berkeley
labs and faculty are working on projects that relate directly to my interest in applying AI and
machine learning to help machines interact with the human world. One Berkeley-affiliated lab
that especially interests me is CITRIS, the Center for Information Technology Research in the
Interest of Society. Its focus on interdisciplinary work that interacts with society at large aligns
well with my research interests, and in particular what drew my attention was the CITRIS
“People and Robots” initiative, which seeks to create automated systems that can integrate well
with people. This research initiative matches my interests exactly. Some Berkeley-affiliated
CITRIS faculty whom I would like to work with include Pieter Abbeel and Anca Dragan.
Professor Abbeel has emphasized deep learning in his research, which fits in well with my own
experience with deep learning from my REU. Professor Dragan researches ways for robots to
account for a person’s internal state, which is again related to my work in emotion detection.
Finally, another Berkeley professor I would be interested in working with, this time not from
CITRIS, is Dan Klein, whose work in Natural Language Processing (NLP) is also of interest to
me, especially given the prominent role of NLP in my Clinic project.
I look forward to the new challenges and opportunities that await me in graduate school
and beyond. Through my research and teaching, I hope to ensure that integration of technology
into everyday life benefits humanity as a whole. I am just now starting my journey to realize that
dream, and I hope to make UC Berkeley part of that journey.
