I am a physics major at Harvey Mudd College with a deep interest in Computer Science. Over the
past three years, I have developed a passion for problem solving and an appreciation for the
mathematical tools involved. I enjoy digging into the gritty details of problems with pen and paper,
and I am not afraid to get in over my head. I am excited by the possibilities in machine learning and
fact that theoretical breakthroughs can produce real applications with minimal delay. My aim upon
completing a Ph.D. is become a researcher in the field either in academia or in a private research
lab.
I spent my freshman and sophomore summers in Dr. Alexander Kutyrev’s instrumentation lab at
NASA Goddard as a student intern. During this time, I tackled a variety of challenges. One of the
notable outcomes for the first summer was a procedure for sub-micron rotation measurement using
phase only correlation, turning a regular lab camera into a high precision optical encoder. It was
astounding how much more powerful this technique was than the methods I had been
experimenting with earlier. With the help of Dr. Kutyrev in the second summer, I developed an
inexpensive cryogenic temperature controller to be used on their infrared imager/spectrometer. I
was fortunate to be able to see this project through from its conception to conclusion. The results
both summers’ research were presented at the Goddard Space Flight Center poster session, and the
abstracts can be found online.
Eager to do research at my home campus, I joined Professor Tom Donnelly’s plasma physics
group in my sophomore year and have been with them ever since. The goal of this project is to
experimentally verify a model for coupling laser energy into plasmas more efficiently than has been
done before. I spent this past summer working to complete the experiment. Under time pressure
and faced with seemingly impenetrable problems, we were forced to be creative. In the last month
of the project, I led a three-man HMC team to setup and perform this experiment in University of
Texas (UT) Austin’s high-energy laser facility in collaboration with our UT colleagues. While the
experiment was ultimately unsuccessful due to a malfunction with the high-power GHOST laser, I
learned how to tackle a big project, break it down into pieces, and take responsibility for the
problems that arise. My senior thesis work focuses on wrapping up this project and automating the
relevant sub-experiments that can be performed on campus.
While Computer Science has only taken the driving seat in my curricular life this past year, it has
been an interest of mine for some time. Many of my physics projects have taken a computational
slant, including an interactive numerical Schrodinger equation solver that my professor plans to
embed into a homework assignment for the class. Energized by a video lecture on adversarial game
playing, I embarked on the journey of writing my own chess engine in C++. While I eventually ran
out of gas for this side project when implementing static exchange evaluation, I had a great deal of
fun in the process and it piqued my interest in AI. More recently, my attention has turned to
machine learning.
I am impressed by the success of convolutional neural networks on image classification
problems. However, I am surprised that traditional convolution layers are used despite not being
resilient against rotation and scaling of elements in the target image, for the same reason that the
method of Eigenfaces performs poorly when faces are not aligned. I gather that this problem can be
alleviated by padding the training set with rotated (and scaled) versions of the original images, but 
why not do away with this altogether? This strikes me as one place where more sophisticated
spectral methods, metering transformations other than translations could be applicable.
Additionally, I’m interested in applications of nonlinear dimensionality reduction more generally. I
see this as becoming increasingly important not only as practitioners incorporate data with more
features, but also in moving towards the goal of more general systems with less insight required by
the practitioner.
I wish to pursue a Ph.D. in the foundations of machine learning, and Stanford has multiple
groups performing top tier research in this area. Prof. Li Fei-Fei’s research on joining together object
classification and annotation within scenes is especially compelling. Methods for coupling together
machine learning systems that are solving distinct but related problems seems like an area of
fundamental importance, but also one that is not getting enough attention. On a different note,
Prof. Doug James’ recent work on more realistic physically based audio is fascinating. I love how the
physics, applied math, and computer science come together in this arena to produce rich sound that
can be generated in a reasonable amount of time. In turn, the challenge to produce these sounds
gives insight into which physical principles are responsible for what, like the unexpected importance
of acceleration noise in the sounds of small and stiff objects.
While my physics background is not traditional, I am eager to learn new concepts and adapt as
necessary. I think that the familiarity I have gained during my physics degree with abstract vector
spaces, asymptotics, and smooth manifolds will be invaluable to performing research on the
foundations of machine learning. Furthermore, I hope to bring a fresh set of eyes, thinking along
different pathways than students who proceeded through a CS degree in the usual way.
