For as long as I could remember, I was going to be an astronaut. That is, until I absolutely
wasn’t. By the end of third grade, I had read every book on space exploration in my school’s
library. Attending Space Camp in middle school I reasoned that I could become an engineer and
go to space to fix important spacecraft parts. It wasn’t until I matriculated at Harvey Mudd
College that it became clear to me that my space travel plans were a selfish interest in the
novel, while my vague ideas about sustainable technology were fundamentally tied to who I am,
and became a motivation to pursue a PhD in materials science for renewable energy
applications.
With the perspective of a few years, I see the roots of this passion early on in my life. All of the
most incredible experiences of my life have been in nature, from seeing the milky way for the
first time at eight years old on a camping trip in the mountains, to summiting Mt. Whitney at
sunrise after hiking the 217 miles of the John Muir Trail the summer before I came to college. In
parallel with this intense love of the natural world, I have always had a strong impulse to
conserve. In high school I stopped eating meat when I learned how toxic and wasteful industrial
animal farms could be and built a compost bin in my family’s backyard.
These unexamined threads wove together when I came to Harvey Mudd, where even first-year
classes discussed environmental implications or sustainable applications. A class on energy
engineering my first semester built my familiarity with solar thermal, photovoltaics, and biofuels,
among other alternative energies, while my introductory chemistry class included lectures on
hydrogen storage. Chemistry and physics professors who knew me and my struggle to decide
between majoring in physics or engineering pointed me to materials science courses they
taught, specifically a seminar on materials for energy conversion and storage and a materials
chemistry laboratory culminating in the fabrication of perovskite and quantum dot solar cells.
I also joined the campus chapter of Engineers for a Sustainable World, a national organization
of students and professionals focused on technical sustainability solutions, and attended the
national conference my first year. Presenting a poster on our chapter’s projects and attending
sessions on topics from wind turbine design to aquaponics was intensely energizing. Not only
was I filled with ideas for my group and prepared to be president my sophomore year, I saw how
many fields exist under the umbrella of sustainable technology and realized I needed to find my
niche.
It was an internship at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) with a group
researching new absorber materials for photovoltaics that cemented my direction after
graduation. Classes and a previous summer interning with Bloom Energy, a company that
manufactures and installs solid oxide fuel cells, had piqued my interest in materials engineering,
but my mentor at NREL, a principal investigator running two projects, inspired me to pursue a
PhD and a research-based career.
