It was 3 AM again, in the middle of a desert, at Etscorn Observatory, Socorro, New Mexico. The
three of us stared at pictures of our Asteroid 1998QS52, freshly “out of oven” from 14” Meade LX-
200RX reflector and SBIG STL-1301E CCD camera. The orbit elements of the asteroid flashed on
the screen, after sets of observation data shoved into our Least-Square Plate Reduction and Gauss’s
Method of Orbit Determination program written in VPython. Simultaneously, our simulation program
started showing Asteroid 1998QS52 swirling around the sun, in the next 10 hundred, thousand
and million years – and it eventually crashes into the sun. For the first time, I felt the destiny of this
little rock tightly entangled with us through the power of computing and mathematics. Since then,
the center of my undergraduate education at Harvey Mudd became to understand our physical world
deeply through mathematics and computer science. My research experiences and coursework have
furthermore convinced me to pursue graduate study in algebraic geometry and theoretical computer
science. My long term goal is to become a professor or researcher in mathematics who can explore
and share the knowledge in math and CS theory for the rest of my lifetime.
My focus on algebraic geometry research and pure math throughout my undergraduate education
has equipped me the skills to synthesize techniques across various math fields. For my senior thesis, I
am working with Professor Dagan Karp on “tropical derivation of the cohomology ring on heavy/light
Hassett spaces”. We are interested in finding the cohomology ring of Hassett spaces using tropical
geometry. Heavy/light Hassett spaces are moduli spaces for weighted stable curves with heavy/light
marked points, denoted as Mg,n for genus g and degree n. Based on work done by Cavalieri
, which showed that tropical compactification is a wonderful compactification of the hyperplane
arrangements on these heavy/light Hassett spaces, we want to combinatorially calculate M0,n
trop
,
a polyhedral complex parametrizing leaf-labeled metric trees that can be thought of as Bergman
fan. Furthermore, we can construct from the fan a toric variety XΣ. We could then calculate the
cohomology ring of XΣ, which is isomorphic to the cohomology ring of M0,n , thereby giving a
presentation of the intersection theory of these Hassett spaces. From this project, I learned to tackle
and internalize a problem from many different angles. For example, toric variety and its relations
with fans enlarged my understanding of it from scheme theory, and also shed light on computing the
cohomology ring combinatorially. I also benefited from the habit of reading diverse literature from
seemingly unrelated fields such as analysis and matroid theory and having meaningful discussions
with mathematicians from other fields.
My starting point for tropical geometry was my desire for a deep understanding of physics and
computational problems. During the Southern California Algebraic Topology Seminar at UCLA
2015, I learned more about Gromov-Witten theory, which bestows rich tools for enumerative algebraic
geometry. I was inspired by the connections to physics, as well as combinatorics and computational
problems, and so I completed a reading course on tropical geometry with Professor Karp
during my junior year. We studied extensively throughout the Introduction to Tropical Geometry
by Professor Sturmfels and Maclagan, which set the foundation for my thesis. I also started studying
Ravi Vakil’s notes on foundations of algebraic geometry from junior year. His guidance from a
category theory point of view made me think clearly. Working through exercises and readings from
both of these books made me grow tremendously over the year.
Doing research in computational and applied math also enhanced my mathematical maturity.
I worked on a research project at Google Research and Machine Intelligence during the summer
of 2016, with Google research scientists Caroline Pantofaru and Malcolm Slaney. Our goal was to
build deep learning models to understand human saliency events and detect active speakers in videos
 by leveraging both image and audio signals. I successfully constructed deep learning networks
with TensorFlow open-source library and evolved the model through integrating various techniques.
I also built large data processing pipelines to correctly extract data and worked with complex
1
Berkeley EECS, Computer Science Shiyue Li
infrastructure. This hybrid of a researcher and a software engineer ushered me to machine learning
from a statistical and industrial perspective. Most importantly, I learned how to be open and flexible
to adjusting the goals and scopes of research problems, by posing questions and constantly making
connections to other seemingly unrelated questions.
My multiple research projects in matrix analysis and spectral graph theory with Professor
Stephan Garcia, which extend from my junior year to the present, also prepare me to be a better
researcher. We first investigated the conditions for similarity between the permutation products
of multiple matrices based on . Then we looked into complex symmetric matrices and Hermitian
matrices, to obtain a stronger interlacing theorem than theorems in Danciger’s work . We used
variations of Courant-Fischer Theorem and take the minimum/maximum eigenvalues/singular values
over specific subspaces of C
n. Furthermore, our interest in matrix analysis extended to graph
theory. It is known that non-isomorphic graphs might have cospectral adjacency matrices, meaning
solely eigenvalues of adjacency matrices cannot distinguish non-isomorphic graphs. Inspired by
matrix perturbation theory, we attach one vertex to fully connect to a graph. By considering the
characteristic polynomial of the new adjacency matrix M, we could distinguish non-isomorphic yet
cospectral trees by examining hMpe, ei where 1 ≤ p ≤ |V | and e is an all-one vector. Having found
counter-examples for using this method to distinguish regular graphs or regular graphs with singleton
vertices appended, we are now to apply variations of this method to study more graph-isomorphism
problems. This experience has trained me to constantly learn new math, ask questions and make
connections. It also showed me the joy of working on multiple problems at the same time, which
inspire us to apply machinery from other subjects.
Another event that cultivated my love for algorithms and computing is my summer research
in 2014. To understand DNA segregation in bacteria cells, I worked with Professor Blerta Shtylla
and implemented the Gillespie algorithms and Next Sub-volume Method to simulate diffusion and
reaction of ParA and ParB proteins with C++ and XML. Words cannot explain the excitement I had
when I was able to apply graph theory theorems and knowledge from algorithms to computational
biology for the first time in my life.
I have found joy in synthesizing math and other sciences, and will keep doing so in my research.
Thanks to broad science education at Mudd, I have enjoyed wide range of CS courses from Data
Structures and Program Development to Advanced Topics in Algorithms. My love for quantum
information has tightened my grasp of algebra by keeping me thinking quantum encoding protocols
using group theory and linear algebra. Engineering systems and signal processing courses systematized
my understanding of Fourier analysis and operator theory.
In addition to coursework, conferences also develop my passion in engaging in the math community:
in Student Tropical Algebraic Geometry Seminar at Yale University, and Western Algebraic
Geometry Symposium (WAGS 2016), I was exposed to research projects by other mathematicians
and was able to learn from scholars who are as passionate as me. In Grace Hopper Conferences, I
was always among the first few in line for resaerch talks on advancing technologies. Serving as the
Harvey Mudd College Math Club President and working as a grader/tutor for many math/physics
courses also deepened my love for the community and hope to contribute more to the future scholar
circle I work in.
I found great joy in music, through playing the piano and classical guitar, composing music
for majority of my life. I also enjoy literature and philosophy, puzzles, the game of Go, learning
languages, and traveling.
Given the above research and industry experiences, I am motivated to dedicate myself wholeheartedly
to algebraic geometry or theoretical computer science research at Berkeley. These fields
draw techniques from so many math fields – algebra, analysis, topology, algorithms, probability,
graphs and so on – the synthesis of which has inspired me to do mathematics research for so long. In
particular, I want to continue my aforementioned study in tropical geometry with Professor Bernd
Sturmfels. I met with student Bo Lin and heard about his methodology and pedagogy, which interested
me tremendously. In addition, working with mathematicians in Google’s Machine Perception
team for a summer ushered me to the depth of theoretical machine learning. I hope to continue to
contribute to this field by studying with Professor. In addition, my experience with spectral graph
theory and matrix analysis draws me to Professor Luca Trevisan’s research. Given my background,
my passion for math and CS, and my diligence, I’m ready for the intellectual life at Berkeley.
