When I arrived at Harvey Mudd for my freshman year, I didn’t know that I would study
theoretical condensed matter physics. I was generally interested in science, and had meandered
between summer programs in chemistry and psychology in high school. In that
first year, I took Harvey Mudd’s Common Core, which included rigorous introductions to
chemistry, biology, physics, mathematics, and computer science. These classes taught me
to appreciate the broad applicability of scientific thinking – we were able to tackle diverse
subjects from linear algebra to thermodynamics. Of these topics, the one that initially
stood out was our introduction to quantum chemistry during our chemical structure course.
The theory, based on a few simple but unintuitive premises, was strange, but it amazingly
predicted chemical processes ranging all the way from spectra to chemical bonding. Even
though I found the subject confusing, the possibility that chemical reactions could be predicted
by physics was a compelling reason to overcome the difficulty. This fascination with
the predictive power of quantum mechanics eventually led me to major in physics.
The ideas in physics that resonated with me were those that unified the apparently disjoint
subjects of Core, and seemed to naturally invite further study. In developing quantum
mechanics, we generalized the linear algebra I learned in my freshman math classes to infinite
dimensional spaces of functions. This idea has only gotten deeper, and it continues to motivate
my further study of mathematics. Quantum mechanics was combined with statistical
mechanics to justify the laws of thermodynamics, but the theory had an unsettling restriction
to equilibrium, which prompted my interest in modern statistical physics. I enjoy theoretical
physics because it connects different fields of science through the analysis of simple systems,
in addition to being interesting in its own right. This opens up the opportunity for fruitful
collaboration across disciplines in my research. In particular, I have found that the systems
considered in condensed matter physics have broad applicability in other sciences, from engineering
to biology. I strive to be an effective collaborator when working on these shared
systems, paying attention to clear communication. As I learn to convey results in physics to
non-physicists as part of my research, I hope that I will become a better teacher of physics
for all audiences.
Intellectual Merit: Independent Study
In preparing for theoretical research, I have often found it necessary to study subjects that I
either do not have time to take formally or are not offered at my university. In particular, I
have found it useful to study the more mathematical aspects of physics on my own, leaving
time to take cross-disciplinary classes such as physical chemistry. I have audited several
classes that do not appear on my transcript, including abstract algebra and an additional
course in linear algebra. I also studied out of lecture notes and books for several more areas,
such as general topology. More formally, I conducted a full-semester independent study
with Dr. Cave, in which we explored the representation-theoretic foundations of quantum
mechanics, the quantum theory of light, and scattering theory. Studying these extra subjects
gives me a more complete picture of the structure of physical theories.
Intellectual Merit: Research Experience
My first research experience was in Dr. Cave’s theoretical chemistry group at Harvey Mudd
in the summer of 2014. The project was to numerically compute the diabatic states of a
double delta function potential well. Diabatic states, in which the electronic coupling due to
nuclear motion vanishes, are thought to be natural basis states in describing electron transfer
reactions, as the quantum mechanical transition amplitude reduces to an off-diagonal element
of the Hamiltonian. These states are typically computed using approximate definitions of
the basis, so the goal of the project was to examine the properties of the exact definition
in a simple system. Understanding the mathematical foundations of electron transfer can
inform the construction of reasonable approximations for use in predicting real transfers.
This type of reaction is of considerable interest, as it underlies biological processes such as
photosynthesis and the electron transport chain in metabolism.
As my first research experience, which I attempted before taking a dedicated course in
quantum mechanics, progress was slow. I spent the first half of the summer meticulously
debugging code and working from a misconception about diabatic states. Even so, I had
many invigorating and often speculative conversations with Dr. Cave, and developed the
basis of my current understanding of quantum mechanics. I learned the difficulty of working
on scientific problems, as well as the importance of clearly communicating my results, even
when negative. Eventually my persistence, along with those many useful conversations, paid
off. I succeeded in creating my program, which could calculate and plot a diabatic basis and
give the coupling as a function of well separation and asymmetry in strength. This work was
a major factor in my selection as a Goldwater Scholar, and I also presented my findings in
a poster session at the American Chemical Society’s Spring 2015 national conference.
The next summer, I continued to work in theoretical chemistry, but under Dr. Burke
at UC Irvine. I worked on density functional theory, solving simple models with the aim
of improving approximations to the kinetic energy functional. This functional, which gives
the kinetic energy of an electron cloud given only the density, has few successful direct
approximations. Instead, the kinetic energy is often computed using a non-interacting wavefunction
that produces the electron density, at the cost of introducing a set of non-linear
matrix equations. A better approximation to the functional could replace these equations,
possibly speeding up calculations. Since density functional theory has become a ubiquitous
method in quantum chemistry, a promising result would spark general collaboration with
other chemists. In addition, I found the working on theory itself quite fun, as it involves
understanding functional calculus, a beautiful area of mathematics. Unfortunately, the work
did not produce a publication, although I was able to present the solutions to my models in
a talk and poster session at Harvey Mudd.
Finally, this past summer, I joined Dr. Liu’s condensed matter physics group at the University
of Pennsylvania as part of the REU program at the Laboratory for Research on the
Structure of Matter (LRSM). The project was on the mechanical origins of segmentation in
the fruit fly embryo, and was carried out in collaboration with Dr. DiNardo’s developmental
biology lab at the University of Pennsylvania. About 7-10 hours into development, a fruit fly
embryo imaged under a confocal microscope begins to visually form the segments characteristic
of insect bodies. The tissue appears to undergo a banded order-disorder transition. What
is particularly exciting is that it also develops a counter-intuitive tension anisotropy at the
cell interfaces in the ordered state, in which the longer interfaces appear to be under higher
tension. As this is the opposite of what we would expect from naive energy minimization
arguments, there appears to be a mechanical mystery in the system. The research also helps
unravel the development of structure during the early stages of life, a fundamental question
in biology. I worked on implementing topological structure extraction and cell tracking
code for analyzing confocal microscope images, which can be used by both physicists and
biologists when analyzing the tissue. I also began to experiment with simulations of tissue,
the subject of my research proposal. At the end of the summer, I wrote an unpublished
summary report for the LRSM, and gave a talk to other REU students at the program. I
am continuing this work for my senior thesis at Harvey Mudd.
Broader Impacts: Collaboration
All of my prior research has been carried out in collaboration with non-physicists, and as my
research proposal details, I will continue to collaborate in my graduate studies. Theoretical
physicists can contribute to cross-disciplinary studies by analyzing the aspects of systems
described by simple quantitative models. For example, the models of biological tissue considered
by physicists may have the ability to explain simple rearrangement processes relevant
in developmental biology. These models can also be of considerable theoretical interest, with
the potential to produce general insight. This is the case with glassy transitions in biological
tissue, the subject of my research proposal. I also simply enjoy working in a cross-disciplinary
environment, having lived among scientists from other fields both at Harvey Mudd and at
the University of Pennsylvania. I love seeing the perspectives they bring, and their ideas
often prompt my own. In my research, I will invest time into learning the goals of my collaborators
and their field and making the results of theoretical physics more accessible to them.
Finally, in learning to make theoretical physics more accessible to collaborators, I believe
that I will be better able to communicate with the general public.
Broader Impacts: Teaching and Outreach
Clear communication is one of the foundations of the scientific community, and this applies
to teaching just as much as it applies to collaboration. I have made efforts to improve my
teaching of physics by participating in outreach and tutoring programs. For example, I
have helped design science lessons for elementary school students as part of a local outreach
program. In one of these lessons, we demonstrated the principles of sound waves, such as
pitch, by having them build a simple pan flute. Participating in these programs helps me to
understand the aspects of my study that become general knowledge, and to think about how
to increase awareness of the basic principles of physics. I also helped to pilot, and continue to
teach in, a new tutoring program at Harvey Mudd. It is intended for students entering with
less training in Core subjects by supplementing our Academic Excellence program. In that
capacity, I have served as a tutor not only for physics, but also for chemistry and computer
science. This opportunity has given me the chance to think about the pedagogical needs of
different fields of science and engineering, as the students in the program are interested in a
wide variety of fields. For example, in one session with an aspiring engineer, we worked out
the purpose of brushes on electric motors using a simple wire loop in a magnetic field model.
After we worked the problem, the student started telling me about the modern design of
airplanes. Suddenly, I was the one being taught, this time about the physics of air flow
over wings and the stability of helicopters. When I instruct courses in the future, I intend
to keep these experiences in mind, paying attention to key points for non-physicists, and
working examples that appeal to their interests when possible. Since most scientists pass
through a basic physics course at some point, the pedagogy choices made by physicists has
the potential to impact the education of the scientific community as a whole.
