When I arrived at Harvey Mudd for my freshman year, I did not know that I would study theoretical physics. What drew me to the subject was the way in which it unified the apparently disjoint subjects I learned in my introductory classes, from mathematics to chemistry. In developing quantum mechanics, we generalized the linear algebra I learned in my freshman math classes to infinite dimensional spaces of functions. Quantum mechanics was combined with statistical mechanics to justify the laws of thermodynamics we learned in freshman chemistry, but the theory had an unsettling restriction to equilibrium. These subjects prompted my interest in modern statistical physics and condensed matter theory, which leverages these theories to explain systems of broad scientific relevance, ranging from biology to engineering. Independent Study In preparing for theoretical research, I have often found it necessary to study subjects that I either do not have time to take formally or are not offered at Harvey Mudd. I have audited several classes that do not appear on my transcript, including abstract algebra and an additional course in linear algebra. I also studied out of lecture notes and books for several more areas, such as general topology. More formally, I conducted a full-semester independent study with Dr. Cave, in which we explored the representation-theoretic foundations of quantum mechanics, the quantum theory of light, and scattering theory. Research Experience My first research experience was in Dr. Cave’s theoretical chemistry group at Harvey Mudd in the summer of 2014. The project was to numerically compute the diabatic states of a double delta function potential well. Diabatic states are thought to be natural basis states in describing electron transfer reactions, a fundamental step in biological processes such as photosynthesis. These states are typically computed using approximate definitions of the basis, so the goal of the project was to examine the properties of the exact definition in a simple system. I created a program that calculated and plotted a diabatic basis and gave the coupling as a function of well separation and asymmetry in strength. This work was a major factor in my selection as a Goldwater Scholar, and I also presented my findings in a poster session at the American Chemical Society’s Spring 2015 national conference. The next summer, I continued to work in theoretical chemistry, but under Dr. Burke at UC Irvine. I worked on density functional theory, solving simple models with the aim of improving approximations to the kinetic energy functional. This functional, which gives the kinetic energy of an electron cloud given only the density, has few successful direct approximations. A more popular, but indirect, method of computing the kinetic energy involves introducing a set of non-linear matrix equations. Replacing these equations with a better approximation to the functional might speed up calculations. I presented the solutions to my models in a talk and poster session at Harvey Mudd. Finally, this past summer, I joined Dr. Liu’s condensed matter physics group at the University of Pennsylvania as part of the REU program at the Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter. The project was carried out in collaboration with Dr. DiNardo’s developmental biology lab at the University of Pennsylvania studying fruit fly embryos.
About 7-10 hours into development, a fruit fly embryo begins to visually form the segments characteristic of insect bodies in the outer layer of tissue. It also develops a counter-intuitive tension anisotropy at the cell interfaces in some of the segments, in which the longer interfaces appear to be under higher tension. As this is the opposite of what we would expect from naive energy minimization arguments, there appears to be a mechanical mystery in the system. I worked on implementing topological structure extraction and cell tracking code for analyzing images of the cell sheets. I also began to experiment with simulations of tissue, which can be used to elucidate the mechanical causes of the segmentation. I am continuing this work for my senior thesis at Harvey Mudd, and am currently implementing a tissue simulation in Rust, a new systems programming language that is designed to prevent memory-related bugs. Research and Career Goals I plan to continue my study of condensed matter physics in graduate school. I have a particular interest in systems that are investigated in multiple disciplines, and that could extend my previous work in theoretical chemistry and biological physics. Thus, I would like to work with the Torquato group on glassy materials and packing, the Car group on MD or DFT simulations of materials, or the Bhatt group on magnetic and electronic systems of interest in engineering. In addition, I would investigate the interdisciplinary research opportunities at PRISM, the Princeton Center for Complex Materials, and the Simons Center for Systems Biology. The systems studied in these groups are complex in nature and typically require com- putational simulation to understand theoretically. I have experience in writing simulation code, both for my first research project with Dr. Cave and for my thesis work with Dr. Liu. One of the skills I hope to offer my future research group and cross-disciplinary collaborators is the ability to implement new simulations and maintain and improve existing code bases. I am willing to learn new languages and tools as the computer science community develops them, especially when they provide clear benefits such as helping to avoid bugs. Finally, I intend to further develop my teaching ability, both as a graduate student and in my post-graduate career. While at Harvey Mudd, I helped to pilot a new tutoring program, intended for students with less training in our core subjects. After graduating, I am planning to seek an academic position, which will have an important teaching component. Since most scientists pass through a basic physics course at some point, the pedagogy choices made by physicists have the potential to impact the education of the scientific community as a whole.
